.\" Man page for osu-unpin-vm-from-az.sh
.\" Written in classic troff/groff format
.TH OSU-UNPIN-VM-FROM-AZ 1 "2026-04-24" "osu-unpin-vm-from-az 0.1.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
osu-unpin-vm-from-az \- remove Availability Zone constraint from OpenStack VM
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B osu-unpin-vm-from-az.sh
.RB [ \-h | \-\-help ]
.RB [ \-v | \-\-version ]
.PP
.B osu-unpin-vm-from-az.sh
.RB [ \-t | \-\-target\-host
.IR HOST ]
.RB [ \-\-venv
.IR PATH ]
.RB [ \-\-dry\-run ]
.RB [ \-f | \-\-force ]
.RB [ \-\-insecure ]
.RB [ \-q | \-\-quiet ]
.I SERVER
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B osu-unpin-vm-from-az.sh
removes the Availability Zone (AZ) hard request from an OpenStack VM to
enable cross-AZ cold migration. When a VM is created with an explicit AZ,
Nova stores this as a hard constraint that prevents the scheduler from
placing the VM in other AZs during migration.
.PP
This script uses the shelve/unshelve workflow with the
.B \-\-no\-availability\-zone
flag (requires Nova API >= 2.91 and python-openstackclient >= 9.0.0):
.IP 1. 3
Stop the instance (if running)
.IP 2. 3
Shelve the instance
.IP 3. 3
Wait for SHELVED_OFFLOADED state
.IP 4. 3
Unshelve with \-\-no\-availability\-zone [--host TARGET]
.PP
After unpinning, the VM can be cold-migrated to any AZ.
.SS Automatic Client Setup
If the system
.B openstack
client is outdated (< 9.0.0), the script automatically creates a Python
virtual environment at
.I ~/.osu-tools/osc-venv
with the required client version. This is a one-time setup.
.SH OPTIONS
.SS Placement Options
.TP
.BR \-t ", " \-\-target\-host " " \fIHOST\fR
Target compute host for unshelve. If not specified, the scheduler
chooses placement freely.
.SS Execution Options
.TP
.B \-\-dry\-run
Show what would be done without making changes.
.TP
.BR \-f ", " \-\-force
Skip confirmation prompt.
.TP
.B \-\-insecure
Allow insecure SSL connections (skip certificate verification).
.TP
.B \-\-venv " " \fIPATH\fR
Use a specific Python venv instead of auto-detection.
.SS Other Options
.TP
.BR \-q ", " \-\-quiet
Suppress progress output.
.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-version
Display version information and exit.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Display usage information and exit.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Successful execution.
.TP
.B 1
Error occurred (missing dependencies, authentication failure, API error).
.SH EXAMPLES
Unpin a VM (scheduler chooses new host):
.PP
.RS
.nf
$ osu-unpin-vm-from-az.sh my-vm
.fi
.RE
.PP
Unpin and place on specific host:
.PP
.RS
.nf
$ osu-unpin-vm-from-az.sh --target-host compute-node-05 my-vm
.fi
.RE
.PP
Dry run to see what would happen:
.PP
.RS
.nf
$ osu-unpin-vm-from-az.sh --dry-run my-vm
.fi
.RE
.PP
Skip confirmation prompt:
.PP
.RS
.nf
$ osu-unpin-vm-from-az.sh --force my-vm
.fi
.RE
.SH ENVIRONMENT
The script requires:
.IP \(bu 2
Valid OpenStack credentials sourced (e.g.,
.BR "source ~/openrc.sh" ).
.IP \(bu 2
OpenStack admin privileges.
.IP \(bu 2
Python 3 with venv support (for automatic client setup).
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.osu-tools/osc-venv
Automatically created Python venv with python-openstackclient >= 9.0.0.
.SH NOTES
.SS Why Unpin?
When a VM is created with an explicit AZ (e.g.,
.BR "openstack server create --availability-zone az1" ),
Nova stores this as a hard constraint in the
.B request_specs
table. This prevents cross-AZ migrations even when the target AZ has
available capacity.
.PP
Unpinning removes this constraint, allowing:
.IP \(bu 2
Cold migration to any AZ
.IP \(bu 2
Better resource utilization across AZs
.IP \(bu 2
Infrastructure-level redundancy when AZ-level redundancy isn't needed
.SS Downtime
The VM will experience downtime during the procedure:
.IP \(bu 2
Stop: brief
.IP \(bu 2
Shelve: VM is shut down and disk snapshotted
.IP \(bu 2
Unshelve: VM is recreated from snapshot
.PP
Plan for a maintenance window of several minutes.
.SS Verification
Use
.BR osu-track-az-requirement (1)
to verify the AZ constraint was removed.
.SH AUTHORS
Ciro Iriarte <ciro.iriarte+software@gmail.com>
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR openstack (1),
.BR osu-track-az-requirement (1),
.BR nova (1)
