.\" Man page for osu-import-cloud-images.sh
.\" Written in classic troff/groff format
.TH OSU-IMPORT-CLOUD-IMAGES 1 "2026-03-26" "osu-import-cloud-images 1.2" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
osu-import-cloud-images \- import upstream cloud images into OpenStack Glance
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B osu-import-cloud-images.sh
.RB [ \-h | \-\-help ]
.RB [ \-v | \-\-version ]
.RB [ \-i | \-\-interactive ]
.RB [ \-b | \-\-batch ]
.RB [ \-l | \-\-list ]
.RB [ \-d | \-\-distro
.IR NAME ]
.RB [ \-f | \-\-format
.IR FMT ]
.RB [ \-\-visibility
.IR VIS ]
.RB [ \-\-os\-license
.IR LIC ]
.RB [ \-\-force ]
.RB [ \-\-no\-customize ]
.RB [ \-\-arch
.IR ARCH ]
.RB [ \-n | \-\-dry\-run ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B osu-import-cloud-images.sh
discovers the latest upstream cloud images from distribution mirrors, downloads
them, optionally customizes them (e.g. injecting qemu-guest-agent), converts
them to the target disk format, and uploads them to OpenStack Glance with
standardized metadata properties optimized for virtio, UEFI, and q35
machine type.
.PP
Supported distributions (last two releases each, discovered dynamically):
.IP \(bu 3
Debian
.IP \(bu
Ubuntu LTS
.IP \(bu
Rocky Linux (plain and LVM variants)
.IP \(bu
openSUSE Leap
.IP \(bu
Oracle Linux
.PP
The default disk format is
.B raw
which is recommended for Ceph RBD backends to leverage copy-on-write cloning
and avoid double conversion overhead that qcow2 incurs.
.PP
Workflow per image:
.IP 1. 4
Scan public mirrors for available versions
.IP 2.
Download cloud image (cached in /var/tmp/os-cloud-images/)
.IP 3.
Optionally customize via virt-customize (see
.B IMAGE CUSTOMIZATIONS
below)
.IP 4.
Convert to target disk format (raw or qcow2)
.IP 5.
Upload to Glance with standardized metadata properties
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-version
Display version information and exit.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Display usage information and exit.
.TP
.BR \-i ", " \-\-interactive
Select images interactively from the discovered catalog.
This is the default when running on a TTY.
.TP
.BR \-b ", " \-\-batch
Import all discovered images non-interactively.
.TP
.BR \-l ", " \-\-list
List discovered images and exit without importing.
.TP
.BR \-d ", " \-\-distro " " \fINAME\fR
Filter by distribution family. Supported values:
.BR debian ", " ubuntu ", " rocky ", " opensuse ", " oracle .
.TP
.BR \-f ", " \-\-format " " \fIFMT\fR
Target disk format for Glance:
.B raw
(default, recommended for Ceph RBD) or
.BR qcow2 .
.TP
.BI \-\-visibility " VIS"
Image visibility in Glance:
.B public
(default) or
.BR private .
Public images are visible to all projects; private images are only
visible to the uploading project.
.TP
.BI \-\-os\-license " LIC"
Override the
.B os_license
image property (default: "opensource"). Useful for images requiring
license tracking (e.g. "rhel" for Red Hat Enterprise Linux).
.TP
.B \-\-force
Replace existing images with the same name instead of skipping.
.TP
.B \-\-no\-customize
Skip virt-customize steps (guest-agent injection, ptp_kvm, etc.).
Useful when customization will be handled via cloud-init instead.
.TP
.BI \-\-arch " ARCH"
Target architecture (default: x86_64). Currently only x86_64 is supported.
.TP
.BR \-n ", " \-\-dry\-run
Show what would be done without making any changes.
.SH IMAGE CUSTOMIZATIONS
When
.BR virt-customize (1)
is available (and
.B \-\-no\-customize
is not used), the following per-distribution customizations are applied:
.TP
.B Debian, Ubuntu \(em guest-agent
Installs the
.B qemu-guest-agent
package, which is not included in these cloud images by default.
.TP
.B openSUSE Leap \(em ptp-fix
Injects
.I /etc/modules-load.d/ptp_kvm.conf
to load the
.B ptp_kvm
kernel module at boot for accurate time synchronization.
.TP
.B Rocky Linux LVM \(em lvm-pvresize
Injects a cloud-init bootcmd
.RI ( /etc/cloud/cloud.cfg.d/99-pvresize.cfg )
that runs
.B pvresize
on all physical volumes at every boot. After a Cinder volume resize and
reboot, the VG automatically gains free space. LV allocation
.RB ( lvresize / lvcreate )
is left to the user.
.TP
.B Rocky Linux (plain), Oracle Linux
No customization needed; qemu-guest-agent is already included in these
cloud images.
.PP
All customized images have
.I /etc/machine-id
truncated to zero length to avoid duplicate machine IDs when cloning.
.SH GLANCE IMAGE PROPERTIES
The following standardized properties are set on every imported image:
.PP
.TS
tab(|);
lb lb
l l.
Property|Value
_
os_type|linux
hw_machine_type|q35
hw_firmware_type|uefi
hw_scsi_model|virtio-scsi
hw_disk_bus|scsi
hw_vif_model|virtio
hw_vif_multiqueue_enabled|true
hw_virtio_packed_ring|true
hw_video_model|virtio
hw_serial_port_count|1
hw_qemu_guest_agent|true
os_require_quiesce|true
hw_require_fsfreeze|true
.TE
.PP
Per-distribution properties are also set:
.PP
.TS
tab(|);
lb lb lb lb lb
l l l l l.
Distribution|os_distro|os_admin_user|has_auto_disk_config|os_license
_
Debian|debian|debian|true|opensource
Ubuntu|ubuntu|ubuntu|true|opensource
Rocky Linux|rocky|rocky|true|opensource
Rocky Linux (LVM)|rocky|rocky|false|opensource
openSUSE Leap|opensuse|opensuse|true|opensource
Oracle Linux|oel|oracle|false|opensource
.TE
.PP
The
.B os_version
property is initially set to the version discovered from the mirror
(e.g. "24.04", "9.7", "15.6").
When
.BR virt-cat (1)
is available, the precise version is probed from the downloaded image
by reading
.I /etc/debian_version
(Debian) or
.I /etc/os-release
(all other distributions), yielding point releases such as "12.13"
for Debian.
.PP
The
.B os_license
property defaults to "opensource" for all discovered distributions and can
be overridden with the
.B \-\-os\-license
option (e.g. "rhel" for Red Hat Enterprise Linux images).
.SH PROXY SUPPORT
The script honours the standard
.BR http_proxy ", " https_proxy " and " no_proxy
environment variables (case-insensitive).
When any of these are set, the proxy configuration is automatically forwarded
to the guest package manager during image customization (guest-agent
injection).
.PP
The
.BR virt-customize (1)
step runs inside a QEMU usermode (SLIRP) virtual machine.
The appliance interface is brought up via the built-in SLIRP DHCP server,
which works regardless of the host\(aqs LAN configuration.
Once the SLIRP network is active, outbound traffic is NAT-ed through the
host, so the proxy address is reachable from inside the guest.
.PP
Proxy environment variables are stripped from the
.BR virt-customize (1)
invocation itself to prevent them from leaking directly into the appliance
kernel, where they would cause routing failures (the appliance cannot
reach the host\(aqs proxy IP via its own network stack).
.PP
For Debian and Ubuntu images, proxy settings are written to
.I /etc/apt/apt.conf.d/99proxy
inside the guest, and
.B no_proxy
entries are translated to
.B Acquire::http::Proxy::<host> \(dqDIRECT\(dq
rules.
All transient files (proxy config, DHCP-generated resolv.conf) are removed
after package installation.
.PP
Example usage behind a proxy:
.PP
.RS
.nf
export http_proxy=http://proxy:3128
export https_proxy=http://proxy:3128
export no_proxy=localhost,127.0.0.1,.internal.lan
osu-import-cloud-images.sh -b -d debian
.fi
.RE
.SH REQUIREMENTS
The following commands must be available in
.BR PATH :
.PP
.RS
.BR openstack (1)
(python-openstackclient),
.BR qemu-img (1),
.BR jq (1),
.BR curl (1)
or
.BR wget (1)
.RE
.PP
Optional:
.BR virt-customize (1)
(from libguestfs-tools) for guest-agent injection and image customization.
.PP
An OpenStack credentials file must be sourced before running the script
(e.g.,
.IR openrc.sh ).
The credentials should have admin scope for public image uploads.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Successful execution.
.TP
.B 1
Error: missing dependencies, invalid options, download failure, or
Glance upload failure.
.SH EXAMPLES
List available images:
.PP
.RS
.B osu-import-cloud-images.sh -l
.RE
.PP
Import all images interactively:
.PP
.RS
.B osu-import-cloud-images.sh -i
.RE
.PP
Import all Debian images in batch mode:
.PP
.RS
.B osu-import-cloud-images.sh -b -d debian
.RE
.PP
Import as private images with qcow2 format:
.PP
.RS
.B osu-import-cloud-images.sh -b --visibility private -f qcow2
.RE
.PP
Dry run to preview what would be imported:
.PP
.RS
.B osu-import-cloud-images.sh -n -b
.RE
.PP
Import with license override:
.PP
.RS
.B osu-import-cloud-images.sh -b --os-license rhel -d oracle
.RE
.PP
Import Debian images behind a proxy:
.PP
.RS
.nf
export http_proxy=http://proxy:3128
export https_proxy=http://proxy:3128
export no_proxy=localhost,127.0.0.1,.internal.lan
.B osu-import-cloud-images.sh -b -d debian
.fi
.RE
.SH AUTHORS
Ciro Iriarte <ciro.iriarte+software@gmail.com>
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR openstack (1),
.BR qemu-img (1),
.BR virt-customize (1),
.BR jq (1)
