.\" Man page for osu-capacity-report.sh
.\" Written in classic troff/groff format
.TH OSU-CAPACITY-REPORT 1 "2026-03-27" "osu-capacity-report 0.1" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
osu-capacity-report \- report OpenStack resource allocation and efficiency per project
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B osu-capacity-report.sh
.RB [ \-h | \-\-help ]
.RB [ \-v | \-\-version ]
.PP
.B osu-capacity-report.sh
.RB [ \-f | \-\-format
.IR FMT ]
.RB [ \-\-no\-diagnostics ]
.I DOMAIN
.PP
.B osu-capacity-report.sh
.RB \-p | \-\-project
.I PROJECT
.RB [ \-f | \-\-format
.IR FMT ]
.RB [ \-\-no\-diagnostics ]
.PP
.B osu-capacity-report.sh
.RB \-a | \-\-all\-projects
.RB [ \-f | \-\-format
.IR FMT ]
.RB [ \-\-no\-diagnostics ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B osu-capacity-report.sh
reports resource allocation and efficiency for OpenStack instances on a
per-project basis.
For each VM it shows assigned vCPU, RAM, root disk (from the flavor), and
total attached Cinder volume size, alongside real CPU and memory utilisation
obtained from the Nova diagnostics API.
.PP
.B CPU efficiency
is estimated as average utilisation over the VM's lifetime:
.IP
.nf
cpu% = sum(cpu_time_ns) / (uptime_sec \(mu num_cpus \(mu 1e9) \(mu 100
.fi
.PP
This is a lifetime average derived from cumulative CPU time counters, not a
real-time snapshot.
Values near 0% on long-running VMs indicate consistent under-utilisation.
.PP
.B Memory efficiency
uses the hypervisor's balloon-reported usage:
.IP
.nf
ram% = memory_used / memory_maximum \(mu 100
.fi
.PP
.B Important:
Without the
.B virtio-balloon
driver (typically enabled by
.BR qemu-guest-agent ),
the hypervisor cannot observe actual guest memory consumption.
In that case,
.B used
always equals
.B maximum
(reported as \fB~100%\fR).
The tilde (\fB~\fR) prefix flags this as unreliable.
Installing
.B qemu-guest-agent
inside the guest VM enables the balloon driver and provides accurate
memory reporting.
.PP
Diagnostics are only available for
.B ACTIVE
instances.
Stopped, shelved, or error-state VMs show \fB\(em\fR for efficiency columns.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-version
Display version information and exit.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Display usage information and exit.
.TP
.BR \-p ", " \-\-project " " \fIPROJECT\fR
Report a single project (by name or ID).
.TP
.BR \-a ", " \-\-all\-projects
Report across all accessible projects.
.TP
.BR \-f ", " \-\-format " " \fIFMT\fR
Output format:
.BR table
(default),
.BR csv ,
or
.BR json .
Table output goes to stdout with progress on stderr.
CSV and JSON produce clean structured output on stdout.
.TP
.B \-\-no\-diagnostics
Skip Nova diagnostics queries.
Produces an allocation-only report (faster, no efficiency columns).
.TP
.BR \-n ", " \-\-dry\-run
Show what would be queried without making API calls.
.SH OUTPUT FIELDS
.TP
.B VM Name
Instance name (truncated to 22 characters in table mode), or ID if unnamed.
.TP
.B Status
Nova instance state: ACTIVE, SHUTOFF, ERROR, etc.
.TP
.B vCPU
Assigned virtual CPUs from the instance flavor.
.TP
.B RAM(M)
Assigned RAM in MiB from the instance flavor.
.TP
.B Disk(G)
Root disk size in GiB from the instance flavor.
.TP
.B vDisk(G)
Total size of all attached Cinder volumes in GiB.
.TP
.B CPU%
Estimated average CPU utilisation (lifetime, from diagnostics).
.TP
.B RAM%
Balloon-reported memory utilisation.
Prefixed with \fB~\fR when used equals maximum (no balloon driver detected).
.TP
.B Uptime
VM uptime from diagnostics, displayed in human-readable format.
.SH EFFICIENCY METRICS
.SS CPU Utilisation
The Nova diagnostics API provides cumulative CPU time in nanoseconds per
virtual CPU.
Combined with the VM uptime, this yields an average utilisation percentage
over the VM's entire lifetime.
.PP
.B Limitations:
.IP \(bu 3
This is a lifetime average, not a real-time snapshot.
A VM that was idle for 29 days then ran at 100% for 1 day shows ~3%.
.IP \(bu
The
.B qemu-guest-agent
does NOT improve CPU metrics via diagnostics.
Real-time CPU utilisation requires Gnocchi/Ceilometer time-series data.
.SS Memory Utilisation
The diagnostics API returns
.B memory_details.maximum
and
.B memory_details.used
(in GiB, from the hypervisor).
.PP
.B Without virtio-balloon / qemu-guest-agent:
.RS
.B used
always equals
.BR maximum .
The hypervisor has no visibility into guest memory consumption.
Reported as \fB~100%\fR (tilde indicates unreliable).
.RE
.PP
.B With virtio-balloon / qemu-guest-agent:
.RS
.B used
reflects actual guest memory pressure as reported by the balloon driver.
This provides meaningful efficiency data.
.RE
.SH REQUIREMENTS
The following commands must be available in
.BR PATH :
.PP
.RS
.BR openstack (1)
(python-openstackclient),
.BR curl (1),
.BR jq (1)
.RE
.PP
An OpenStack credentials file must be sourced before running the script.
Admin or domain admin scope is required for cross-project reports.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Successful execution.
.TP
.B 1
Error: missing dependencies, authentication failure, or invalid arguments.
.SH EXAMPLES
Report all projects in a domain:
.PP
.RS
.B osu-capacity-report.sh my-domain
.RE
.PP
Report a single project:
.PP
.RS
.B osu-capacity-report.sh -p my-project
.RE
.PP
Report all accessible projects:
.PP
.RS
.B osu-capacity-report.sh -a
.RE
.PP
CSV output for spreadsheet analysis:
.PP
.RS
.B osu-capacity-report.sh -f csv my-domain > report.csv
.RE
.PP
Allocation-only report (faster, no diagnostics):
.PP
.RS
.B osu-capacity-report.sh --no-diagnostics -p my-project
.RE
.SH CAVEATS
.IP \(bu 3
Diagnostics are only available for ACTIVE instances.
Stopped VMs show \(em for efficiency columns.
.IP \(bu
CPU% is a lifetime average, not real-time.
For time-series CPU monitoring, use Gnocchi/Ceilometer.
.IP \(bu
RAM% is unreliable without virtio-balloon/qemu-guest-agent (flagged with ~).
.IP \(bu
The diagnostics API call adds latency per VM.
For large environments, use
.B \-\-no\-diagnostics
for allocation-only reports.
.IP \(bu
The token used for diagnostics may expire during long-running reports.
.SH AUTHORS
Ciro Iriarte <ciro.iriarte+software@gmail.com>
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR openstack (1),
.BR curl (1),
.BR jq (1),
.BR osu-memory-usage-report (1),
.BR osu-retype-vdisk (1),
.BR osu-import-cloud-images (1)
