.\" Man page for osu-implement-multiattach-volumetypes.sh
.\" Written in classic troff/groff format
.TH OSU-IMPLEMENT-MULTIATTACH-VOLUMETYPES 1 "2026-04-24" "osu-implement-multiattach-volumetypes 0.1.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
osu-implement-multiattach-volumetypes \- create multi-attach Cinder volume type variants
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B osu-implement-multiattach-volumetypes.sh
.RB [ \-h | \-\-help ]
.RB [ \-v | \-\-version ]
.PP
.B osu-implement-multiattach-volumetypes.sh
.RB [ \-l | \-\-list ]
.RB [ \-\-insecure ]
.PP
.B osu-implement-multiattach-volumetypes.sh
.RB [ \-n | \-\-dry\-run ]
.RB [ \-f | \-\-force ]
.RB [ \-\-insecure ]
.RB [ \-q | \-\-quiet ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B osu-implement-multiattach-volumetypes.sh
creates multi-attach enabled volume type variants for existing Cinder volume
types backed by Ceph. Multi-attach allows a single volume to be attached to
multiple VMs simultaneously, required for clustered filesystems (GFS2, OCFS2)
and shared storage workloads.
.PP
For each volume type with a
.B volume_backend_name
property, the script creates a variant named
.I <original-type>-multiattach
with the same backend and the
.B multiattach
extra-spec enabled.
.SS Multi-Attach Property
The multi-attach capability is controlled by the extra-spec:
.IP
.B multiattach="<is> True"
.PP
Volumes created with a multi-attach enabled type can be attached to multiple
VMs simultaneously. Volumes created before the type was updated are not
affected.
.SH OPTIONS
.SS Mode Selection
.TP
.BR \-l ", " \-\-list
List volume types grouped by backend, showing regular and multi-attach
variants side by side with status indicators.
.TP
(default)
Create multi-attach variants for all eligible volume types.
.SS Execution Options
.TP
.BR \-n ", " \-\-dry\-run
Show what would be done without making changes.
.TP
.BR \-f ", " \-\-force
Skip confirmation prompt.
.TP
.B \-\-insecure
Allow insecure SSL connections (skip certificate verification).
.SS Other Options
.TP
.BR \-q ", " \-\-quiet
Suppress progress output.
.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-version
Display version information and exit.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Display usage information and exit.
.SH OUTPUT (--list)
.TP
.B Backend
Cinder backend name (maps to Ceph pool).
.TP
.B Regular Type
Standard volume type name.
.TP
.B Multi-Attach Type
Multi-attach enabled variant, or \(em if not created.
.TP
.B Status
Status indicator: \fB\[u2713]\fR (both exist), \fB\[u26a0]\fR (missing multiattach variant).
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Successful execution.
.TP
.B 1
Error occurred (missing dependencies, authentication failure, creation failed).
.SH EXAMPLES
List current volume types by backend:
.PP
.RS
.nf
$ osu-implement-multiattach-volumetypes.sh --list
.fi
.RE
.PP
Dry run to see what would be created:
.PP
.RS
.nf
$ osu-implement-multiattach-volumetypes.sh --dry-run
.fi
.RE
.PP
Create multi-attach variants (with confirmation):
.PP
.RS
.nf
$ osu-implement-multiattach-volumetypes.sh
.fi
.RE
.PP
Create without confirmation:
.PP
.RS
.nf
$ osu-implement-multiattach-volumetypes.sh --force
.fi
.RE
.SH ENVIRONMENT
The script requires:
.IP \(bu 2
Valid OpenStack credentials sourced (e.g.,
.BR "source ~/openrc.sh" ).
.IP \(bu 2
OpenStack admin privileges with volume-type management permissions.
.SH NOTES
.SS Use Cases for Multi-Attach
.IP \(bu 2
.B Clustered filesystems:
GFS2, OCFS2, or other cluster-aware filesystems that coordinate access.
.IP \(bu 2
.B Shared storage:
Oracle RAC, database clusters requiring shared disk access.
.IP \(bu 2
.B High availability:
Active-passive clusters where the secondary node needs read access.
.PP
.B Warning:
Do not use multi-attach with non-cluster-aware filesystems (ext4, xfs).
Concurrent writes without coordination will cause data corruption.
.SS Volume Type Naming
The script uses the suffix
.B -multiattach
for variant names. For example:
.IP
.B cinder-ceph
\(->
.B cinder-ceph-multiattach
.SS Backend Preservation
Multi-attach variants use the same
.B volume_backend_name
as the original type, so volumes are stored in the same Ceph pool.
.SH AUTHORS
Ciro Iriarte <ciro.iriarte+software@gmail.com>
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR openstack (1),
.BR cinder (1)
