.\" Man page for osu-track-az-requirement.sh
.\" Written in classic troff/groff format
.TH OSU-TRACK-AZ-REQUIREMENT 1 "2026-04-23" "osu-track-az-requirement 0.4.1" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
osu-track-az-requirement \- report OpenStack VMs with Availability Zone requirements
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B osu-track-az-requirement.sh
.RB [ \-h | \-\-help ]
.RB [ \-v | \-\-version ]
.PP
.B osu-track-az-requirement.sh
.RB [ \-f | \-\-format
.IR FMT ]
.RB [ \-a | \-\-all\-projects ]
.RB [ \-d | \-\-domain
.IR DOMAIN ]
.RB [ \-m | \-\-mismatch\-only ]
.RB [ \-\-mysql\-unit
.IR UNIT ]
.RB [ \-q | \-\-quiet ]
.PP
.B osu-track-az-requirement.sh
.RB \-p | \-\-project
.I PROJECT
.RB [ \-d | \-\-domain
.IR DOMAIN ]
.RB [ \-f | \-\-format
.IR FMT ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B osu-track-az-requirement.sh
reports OpenStack VMs with their host placement, effective Availability Zone,
and whether an AZ was explicitly requested at creation time.
.PP
This script queries the
.B nova_api.request_specs
table via
.B juju
to obtain authoritative AZ request data. If an AZ is present in the
request_spec, it was explicitly requested at VM creation time.
.PP
.B AZ Request Detection (authoritative from database):
.IP \(bu 2
.B "<az-name>"
\(em AZ was explicitly requested at creation (shows the requested AZ name)
.IP \(bu 2
.B "\(em"
\(em No AZ was requested (scheduler chose placement freely)
.IP \(bu 2
.B "n/a"
\(em Unable to query database (VM may be missing from request_specs)
.PP
.B Important:
The Nova API does not expose the request_spec object. The only authoritative
source for AZ request information is the
.B nova_api.request_specs
database table, which this script queries via juju ssh to the MySQL unit.
.SH OPTIONS
.SS Scope Options
.TP
.BR \-s ", " \-\-server " " \fISERVER\fR
Query a specific VM by name or ID.
.TP
.BR \-a ", " \-\-all\-projects
Include VMs from all projects (requires OpenStack admin privileges).
.TP
.BR \-d ", " \-\-domain " " \fIDOMAIN\fR
Report all VMs in projects belonging to the specified domain.
.TP
.BR \-p ", " \-\-project " " \fIPROJECT\fR
Limit output to a single project, specified by name or ID.
Can be combined with
.B \-d
for cross-domain project lookup.
.SS Filter Options
.TP
.BR \-m ", " \-\-mismatch\-only
Show only VMs where current AZ differs from the requested AZ.
Useful for identifying VMs that have been migrated or evacuated.
.SS Output Options
.TP
.BR \-f ", " \-\-format " " \fIFMT\fR
Set output format. Valid values are
.BR table " (default), " csv ", and " json .
.TP
.BR \-q ", " \-\-quiet
Suppress progress indicators.
.SS Other Options
.TP
.BR \-\-mysql\-unit " " \fIUNIT\fR
Specify the juju MySQL unit to query. By default, the script auto-detects
the leader unit of the mysql-innodb-cluster application.
.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-version
Display version information and exit.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Display usage information and exit.
.SH OUTPUT COLUMNS
.TP
.B ID
Instance UUID.
.TP
.B Name
Instance name.
.TP
.B Project
Project name (only shown with
.BR \-\-all\-projects " or " \-\-domain ).
.TP
.B Status
Nova instance state (ACTIVE, SHUTOFF, ERROR, etc.).
.TP
.B Host
Hypervisor hostname where the VM is running.
.TP
.B Current AZ
Availability Zone where the VM currently resides.
.TP
.B Requested
AZ explicitly requested at boot (from request_specs), or \(em if none.
.TP
.B Match
Whether current AZ matches requested: \fB\[u2713]\fR (match), \fB\[u2717]\fR (mismatch), \fB\(em\fR (n/a).
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Successful execution.
.TP
.B 1
Error occurred (missing dependencies, authentication failure, juju unreachable, invalid options).
.SH EXAMPLES
Report VMs in the current project:
.PP
.RS
.nf
$ osu-track-az-requirement.sh
.fi
.RE
.PP
Report all VMs across all projects:
.PP
.RS
.nf
$ osu-track-az-requirement.sh --all-projects
.fi
.RE
.PP
Report all VMs in a specific domain:
.PP
.RS
.nf
$ osu-track-az-requirement.sh -d my-domain
.fi
.RE
.PP
Report VMs in a specific project:
.PP
.RS
.nf
$ osu-track-az-requirement.sh -p my-project
.fi
.RE
.PP
Report VMs in a specific project within a domain:
.PP
.RS
.nf
$ osu-track-az-requirement.sh -d my-domain -p my-project
.fi
.RE
.PP
Show only VMs that have been migrated (current AZ != requested AZ):
.PP
.RS
.nf
$ osu-track-az-requirement.sh --mismatch-only --all-projects
.fi
.RE
.PP
CSV output for spreadsheet analysis:
.PP
.RS
.nf
$ osu-track-az-requirement.sh -f csv --all-projects > vms.csv
.fi
.RE
.PP
JSON output for scripting (filter mismatches):
.PP
.RS
.nf
$ osu-track-az-requirement.sh -f json --all-projects | jq '.[] | select(.match == false)'
.fi
.RE
.SH ENVIRONMENT
The script requires:
.IP \(bu 2
Valid OpenStack credentials sourced (e.g.,
.BR "source ~/openrc.sh" ).
.IP \(bu 2
SSH access to a juju controller with the MySQL InnoDB Cluster deployed.
.SS Permissions
.IP \(bu 2
.B Default (own project):
Regular OpenStack user + juju SSH access.
.IP \(bu 2
.B --all-projects or -p <other-project>:
OpenStack admin + juju SSH access.
.IP \(bu 2
.B --domain:
OpenStack admin or domain admin + juju SSH access.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/openrc.sh
OpenStack credentials file (typical location).
.SH NOTES
.SS Why Database Access?
The Nova API does not expose the
.B request_spec
object, which contains the original scheduling requirements including any
explicitly requested Availability Zone. This information is stored in the
.B nova_api.request_specs
table and is only accessible via database query.
.PP
This script uses
.B juju ssh
to query the MySQL database, making it suitable for Charmed OpenStack
deployments.
.SS Interpreting Results
.IP \(bu 2
.B "Current AZ differs from Requested (Match = \[u2717])"
\(em The VM was migrated or evacuated after creation.
.IP \(bu 2
.B "Requested = \(em"
\(em The scheduler had full freedom to place the VM; it can be live-migrated
to any host/AZ without constraint.
.IP \(bu 2
.B "Requested = <az-name>"
\(em Future migrations/evacuations are constrained to the requested AZ.
.SH AUTHORS
Ciro Iriarte <ciro.iriarte+software@gmail.com>
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR openstack (1),
.BR osu-capacity-report (1),
.BR juju (1),
.BR nova (1)
