.\" Man page for osu-retype-vdisk.sh
.\" Written in classic troff/groff format
.TH OSU-RETYPE-VDISK 1 "2026-03-27" "osu-retype-vdisk 0.1.4" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
osu-retype-vdisk \- retype (migrate) OpenStack volumes between Ceph pools
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B osu-retype-vdisk.sh
.RB [ \-h | \-\-help ]
.RB [ \-v | \-\-version ]
.PP
.B osu-retype-vdisk.sh
.RB [ \-i | \-\-interactive ]
.RB [ \-n | \-\-dry\-run ]
.PP
.B osu-retype-vdisk.sh
.RB { \-r | \-\-retype
.IR VOL_ID }...
.RB \-T | \-\-type
.I TARGET_TYPE
.RB [ \-y | \-\-yes ]
.RB [ \-n | \-\-dry\-run ]
.RB [ \-\-no\-monitor ]
.RB [ \-\-interval
.IR SEC ]
.RB [ \-\-timeout
.IR SEC ]
.PP
.B osu-retype-vdisk.sh
.RB \-s | \-\-server
.IR NAME | ID
.RB \-T | \-\-type
.I TARGET_TYPE
.RB [ \-y | \-\-yes ]
.RB [ \-n | \-\-dry\-run ]
.RB [ \-\-no\-monitor ]
.RB [ \-\-interval
.IR SEC ]
.RB [ \-\-timeout
.IR SEC ]
.PP
.B osu-retype-vdisk.sh
.RB \-l | \-\-list
.RB [ \-s | \-\-server
.IR NAME | ID ]
.RB [ \-f | \-\-format
.IR FMT ]
.PP
.B osu-retype-vdisk.sh
.RB \-t | \-\-types
.RB [ \-f | \-\-format
.IR FMT ]
.PP
.B osu-retype-vdisk.sh
.RB \-m | \-\-monitor
.RB [ \-\-interval
.IR SEC ]
.RB [ \-\-timeout
.IR SEC ]
.I VOL_ID
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B osu-retype-vdisk.sh
retypes (migrates) OpenStack Cinder volumes between Ceph pools by changing
the volume type.
It wraps the
.B openstack volume set \-\-type
command with pre-flight validation, progress monitoring, and both an
interactive wizard and a one-shot CLI interface.
.PP
The retype operation triggers a backend-assisted data copy between Ceph
pools.
Cinder coordinates with Nova for attached (in-use) volumes: data is copied
at the storage backend level, and Nova performs a hot-swap of the volume
attachment once the copy completes.
Detached (available) volumes are migrated transparently.
.PP
.B Pre-flight checks
are performed automatically before each retype:
.IP \(bu 3
Volume exists and is accessible
.IP \(bu
Volume is in a valid state (\fBin-use\fR or \fBavailable\fR)
.IP \(bu
Volume has no snapshots (snapshots block migration)
.IP \(bu
Target type exists and differs from the current type
.IP \(bu
For in-use volumes requiring cross-backend migration: the attached instance
is not in \fBstopped\fR (SHUTOFF) state (Nova refuses volume swaps on
stopped VMs)
.SH MODES
.TP
.BR \-i ", " \-\-interactive
Guided wizard mode.
The script walks the user through volume discovery, target type selection,
pre-flight checks, confirmation, and monitored execution.
This is the default when running on a TTY without arguments.
.TP
.BR \-r ", " \-\-retype " " \fIVOL_ID\fR
Specify a volume to retype.
Repeatable: use multiple
.B \-r
flags for multiple volumes, or pass a comma-separated list
(e.g.
.BR "\-r vol1,vol2" ).
Requires
.BR \-T / \-\-type
to specify the target type.
.TP
.BR \-T ", " \-\-type " " \fITYPE\fR
Target volume type for the retype operation.
Required when using
.B \-r
or
.BR \-s .
The type can be specified by name or ID.
.TP
.BR \-s ", " \-\-server " " \fINAME\fR|\fIID\fR " (retype mode)"
Discover volumes from a server instead of specifying them with
.BR \-r .
When combined with
.BR \-T / \-\-type ,
the script enters retype mode, displays the server's volumes, and
prompts the user to select which ones to retype.
When
.B \-\-yes
is used, all volumes are selected automatically.
.TP
.BR \-l ", " \-\-list
List volumes visible to the current user.
When combined with
.BR \-s / \-\-server ,
only volumes attached to that server are shown.
.TP
.BR \-t ", " \-\-types
List available volume types (possible retype targets).
.TP
.BR \-m ", " \-\-monitor
Monitor an in-progress migration for a single volume.
Polls the volume status at a configurable interval and exits when the
migration succeeds, fails, or times out.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-version
Display version information and exit.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Display usage information and exit.
.TP
.BR \-s ", " \-\-server " " \fINAME\fR|\fIID\fR
With
.BR \-l / \-\-list :
filter volumes by server.
With
.BR \-T / \-\-type :
discover volumes from the server for retype (interactive selection).
.TP
.BR \-f ", " \-\-format " " \fIFMT\fR
Output format for
.B \-\-list
and
.BR \-\-types :
.BR table
(default),
.BR csv ,
or
.BR json .
Structured output (CSV, JSON) goes to standard output with no progress
decoration.
.TP
.BR \-y ", " \-\-yes
Skip confirmation prompts.
When combined with
.BR \-\-server ,
all volumes are selected without interactive picking.
.TP
.BR \-n ", " \-\-dry\-run
Show what would be done without making changes.
.TP
.B \-\-no\-monitor
Skip automatic progress monitoring after retype.
The retype command is issued and the script exits immediately.
.TP
.BI \-\-interval " SEC"
Polling interval in seconds for migration monitoring (default: 10).
.TP
.BI \-\-timeout " SEC"
Maximum wait time in seconds for migration monitoring (default: 3600).
If the timeout is reached, the script exits with a warning; the migration
may still be in progress on the backend.
.SH SNAPSHOT HANDLING
Volumes with existing snapshots cannot be retyped.
By default, such volumes fail the pre-flight check.
The
.B \-\-handle\-snapshots
option provides two strategies to resolve this automatically:
.TP
.BI \-\-handle\-snapshots " delete"
Delete all snapshots of the affected volume(s) before retyping.
This is destructive: point-in-time recovery data is lost.
.TP
.BI \-\-handle\-snapshots " backup\-delete"
Backup each snapshot to an object store container, wait for the backup
to complete, then delete the snapshot.
Requires
.BR \-\-backup\-container
to specify the target container (in one-shot mode).
In interactive mode, the user is prompted to select or name a container.
.TP
.BI \-\-backup\-container " NAME"
Object store container name for snapshot backups.
Required with
.BR "\-\-handle\-snapshots backup\-delete"
in one-shot mode.
New containers are created automatically by the backup driver.
.PP
In interactive mode (\fB\-i\fR), if snapshots are detected and no
.B \-\-handle\-snapshots
flag was provided, the wizard prompts the user to choose a strategy
(delete, backup-delete, or skip the affected volumes).
.SH VOLUME SELECTION
When
.B \-\-retype
is combined with
.BR \-\-server ,
the script displays a numbered table of volumes attached to the server
and prompts the user to select which ones to retype.
.PP
Accepted input formats:
.IP \(bu 3
A single number (e.g.
.BR 3 )
.IP \(bu
Comma-separated numbers (e.g.
.BR 1,3,5 )
.IP \(bu
Ranges (e.g.
.BR 2\-5 )
.IP \(bu
.B all
to select every volume
.PP
When
.B \-\-yes
is active, all volumes are selected automatically.
.SH RETYPE FLAG DETECTION
Different versions of
.BR python-openstackclient (1)
use different flag names for the migration policy:
.IP \(bu 3
.B \-\-retype\-policy
(modern versions)
.IP \(bu
.B \-\-migration\-policy
(older versions)
.PP
The script automatically detects the correct flag by inspecting the output
of
.BR "openstack volume set \-\-help" .
The detected flag is displayed during execution.
.SH MIGRATION STATES
During a cross-backend retype (data migration), the Cinder volume transitions
through these states:
.PP
.TS
tab(|);
lb lb
l l.
Field|Progression
_
status|in-use \(-> retyping \(-> in-use
migration_status|(none) \(-> migrating \(-> success
type|old-type \(-> new-type
.TE
.PP
On failure,
.B migration_status
changes to
.BR error .
The monitor mode tracks these fields and exits accordingly.
.PP
.B Same-backend retypes
(where the source and target types map to the same storage backend) complete
instantly.
Cinder changes the type label without moving data, so
.B migration_status
remains
.B none
and no progress polling is needed.
The monitor detects this condition and exits immediately.
.SH REQUIREMENTS
The following commands must be available in
.BR PATH :
.PP
.RS
.BR openstack (1)
(python-openstackclient),
.BR jq (1)
.RE
.PP
An OpenStack credentials file must be sourced before running the script
(e.g.,
.IR openrc.sh ).
No admin privileges are required for normal operations (listing volumes,
retyping own volumes).
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Successful execution.
.TP
.B 1
Error: missing dependencies, authentication failure, pre-flight check
failure, retype command failure, migration error, or timeout.
.TP
.B 130
Interrupted by user (Ctrl+C) during monitoring.
.SH EXAMPLES
Start the interactive wizard:
.PP
.RS
.B osu-retype-vdisk.sh -i
.RE
.PP
List all volumes:
.PP
.RS
.B osu-retype-vdisk.sh -l
.RE
.PP
List volumes attached to a specific server:
.PP
.RS
.B osu-retype-vdisk.sh -l -s web-server-01
.RE
.PP
List volumes as JSON (for scripting):
.PP
.RS
.B osu-retype-vdisk.sh -l -f json
.RE
.PP
List available volume types:
.PP
.RS
.B osu-retype-vdisk.sh -t
.RE
.PP
Retype a single volume (one-shot):
.PP
.RS
.B osu-retype-vdisk.sh -r a1b2c3d4-e5f6-7890-abcd-ef1234567890 -T ssd-pool
.RE
.PP
Retype multiple volumes (repeated -r):
.PP
.RS
.B osu-retype-vdisk.sh -r VOL1_ID -r VOL2_ID -T ssd-pool
.RE
.PP
Retype multiple volumes (comma-separated):
.PP
.RS
.B osu-retype-vdisk.sh -r VOL1_ID,VOL2_ID -T ssd-pool
.RE
.PP
Retype volumes of a server (interactive selection):
.PP
.RS
.B osu-retype-vdisk.sh -s web-server-01 -T ssd-pool
.RE
.PP
Retype all volumes of a server non-interactively:
.PP
.RS
.B osu-retype-vdisk.sh -s web-server-01 -T ssd-pool -y
.RE
.PP
Dry run (preview without executing):
.PP
.RS
.B osu-retype-vdisk.sh -r VOL_ID -T ssd-pool -n
.RE
.PP
Retype a volume with snapshots (delete them first):
.PP
.RS
.B osu-retype-vdisk.sh -r VOL_ID -T ssd-pool --handle-snapshots delete
.RE
.PP
Retype a volume with snapshots (backup then delete):
.PP
.RS
.B osu-retype-vdisk.sh -r VOL_ID -T ssd-pool --handle-snapshots backup-delete --backup-container vol-snap-backups
.RE
.PP
Monitor an in-progress migration:
.PP
.RS
.B osu-retype-vdisk.sh -m a1b2c3d4-e5f6-7890-abcd-ef1234567890
.RE
.PP
Monitor with a custom polling interval:
.PP
.RS
.B osu-retype-vdisk.sh -m VOL_ID --interval 5 --timeout 7200
.RE
.SH CAVEATS
.IP \(bu 3
.B Stopped VMs block cross-backend retypes.
When an in-use volume is attached to a SHUTOFF instance and the retype
requires data migration between different storage backends (different
.BR volume_backend_name ),
Nova refuses the volume swap with HTTP\ 409
.RI ( "Cannot 'swap_volume' while vm_state stopped" ).
The pre-flight check detects this and fails early with an actionable
message.
Workarounds: start the instance before retyping, or detach the volume
first.
Same-backend retypes (type relabeling without data movement) are not
affected and work regardless of VM state.
.IP \(bu
Volumes with existing snapshots cannot be retyped.
Use
.B \-\-handle\-snapshots
to delete or backup-and-delete snapshots automatically.
.IP \(bu
Migration increases I/O latency and network traffic on the Ceph storage
backend while data is being copied.
Plan migrations during low-usage windows when possible.
.IP \(bu
Volumes are retyped sequentially (one at a time) to avoid overwhelming
the storage backend.
.IP \(bu
Cinder does not report migration progress as a percentage.
The monitor displays elapsed time and status fields only.
.SH AUTHORS
Ciro Iriarte <ciro.iriarte+software@gmail.com>
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR openstack (1),
.BR jq (1),
.BR osu-import-cloud-images (1),
.BR osu-memory-usage-report (1)
